in
summer the sardines are a long way out
to sea
the birds fly hundreds of miles in
search of a meal
once they've sighted their target they
plunge from heights of 30
meters
striking the water at 100 kilometers per
hour
every dive subjects them to enormous
forces
the slightest miscalculation could be
fatal
gametes dive no deeper than 10 meters
so once again they rely on the dolphins
to keep their prey near the surface
but with so much traffic there's always
the danger of a collision
this one has broken her neck
her death will mean that back on the
colony her chick
will probably starve
back at the water's edge some of the
gentoos are bringing pebbles ashore
from the seabed
there are no trees on antarctica so
instead of using twigs or leaves to
build nests
these penguins make theirs from small
stones
picking out the best one and carrying it
all the way to the nest
site is the penguin equivalent of giving
a loved one
a box of chocolates
during the summer months port lockroy is
under almost 24-hour daylight
and the sea ice is finally starting to
break up
outside the post office the couple under
the union jack
are busy building up their nest
down behind the boat shed this pair of
penguins is well ahead of the game
they've lucked out and have found an old
nest already free of snow
over the past week they've been adding
new stones
piling them one on top of the other to
create good drainage
from snow and rain
a dry nest is essential if these birds
are to have any success
in raising young
penguins are fiercely protective of
their pile of stones
and because nests are so tightly packed
together in the colony
neighborly disputes constantly break out
the nest left unattended for more than a
few seconds
is in danger of being stolen
the adult's focus is now set on a
ruthless
competition to mate
a male bids to enter a herd with females
in season
he uses dust to accentuate all his size
and power
another male already established in the
herd
answers the display
and waits
the newcomer responds by scent marking
and moving
even closer
this challenge cannot be tolerated
the resident male has won
having seen off his rival next summer's
calves will likely be years
it's early june and around some old
abandoned buildings on their land
francisco and his wife theresa have come
to check on the current residence
[Music]
the barnes fellows have been here since
march but there's a much larger bird
that comes to nest in the church
almost every year
in a small window hole bar now chicks
about seven weeks old
are close to fledging they nest
sometimes here
and they also do it on the other side
but this year they want to
have a better view of of the lake
barn owls along with five other owl
species breed very successfully in the
montado
it's a sure indication of the plentiful
rodent prey including cabrera's vault
that can be found here
a declining population in the
countryside does at least have a bonus
for the local swallows
the abandoned priests house has provided
some perfect nest sites
each young swallow eats about 150
000 insects before leaving the nest
insects are so abundant in the montado
that a pair of portuguese swallows
regularly rears three brooms
each season rather than the two more
typical in britain
kenya famous for its big cats
the supreme hunters
cheetahs specialize in hunting at speed
though fast they're fragile creatures
built to sprint
after small prey they don't have the
strength or weight of a lion
to bring down larger animals
this male is different he doesn't hunt
alone
he's learnt that there is strength in
numbers
but here there are not just two but
three
cheaters a band of brothers
they have changed their tactics and by
doing so
have taken their prey by surprise
they have learned that working together
they can bring down
large prey
an ostrich a bird that towers over a
cheetah and is more than twice as heavy
it can't fly to escape danger but it can
lash out
with a deadly kick
a female unaware as yet of any danger
even with three of them this is still
highly risky
if one gets injured the other two
couldn't hope to tackle such large prey
on the other hand if they get it right
the rewards
are huge
the male has spotted one of the brothers
but only one
it's not too worried
then suddenly there are three
the female is slower to realize the
danger and the cheetahs switch
tons
it takes the combined effort and weight
of all three brothers
to bring down this powerful bird even
now the ostrich could land
a fatal kick
so far the brothers are winning
ostriches have yet to find a way to foil
such tactics
there is no other species on the planet
that responds as quickly and as
dramatically to the good times as the
desert locust
eggs that have remained in the ground
for 20 years
begin to hatch
the young locusts are known as hoppers
for at this stage they're flightless
they find new feeding grounds by
following the smell
of sprouting grass
normally it takes four weeks for hoppers
to become adults
but when the conditions are right as now
their development
switches to the fast track
as the vegetation in one place begins to
run out
the winged adults release phenomenons
sent messages
which tell others in the group that they
must move on
and when groups merge they form a swarm
an adult locus eats its entire body
weight every day
and a whole swarm can consume literally
hundreds of tons of vegetation
they have to keep on moving
the swarm travels with the wind it's the
most energy-saving way of flying
following the flow of wind means that
they're always heading toward areas
of low pressure places where wind meets
rain
and vegetation starts to grow
as they fly swarms join up with other
swarms
to form gigantic plagues several
billions strong
and as much as 40 miles wide
they will consume every edible thing
that lies in their path
[Music]
this is one of planet earth's greatest
spectacles
it's rarely seen on this scale and it
won't last
long once the food has gone the steady
roar of a billion
beating locust wings will once again be
replaced
by nothing more than the sound of the
desert wind
this is going to be the end of the road
for a lot of salmon
these bears are really hungry they
haven't tasted salmon for 10 months
and the big males battle for the best
fishing spots
the longer the salmon take over their
journey upstream
the weaker they become
and these falls present them with their
biggest challenge yet
although the falls aren't very tall the
bears hold the high ground
the salmon make short exploratory leaps
to see where the bears are
but they don't always get it right
this mother bear has been waiting months
for this moment
competition is fierce for these first
salmon even between a mother
and her own cubs
more and more fish arrive at the foot of
the falls
eventually they have to go for it
regardless of the danger
[Music]
but numbers are on their side for every
salmon that gets caught
hundreds make it past the bears
alessa jaboa
the hunter needs super senses to find
such small
sparse prey
the rupal's desert fox has ears 20 times
more sensitive than our own
the jaboa tries to hide but the hole's
not deep enough
the fox's sensitive nose tells him
exactly where to dig
there's a sneaky back door
if he can squeeze through
time for the jaboa to reveal his own
secret weapon
legs like a kangaroo
the jaboa can hop more than ten times
its own body length
but long legs don't make it easy to hide
they come into their own when the only
option left
is to run for it
sometimes getting over is tough
better to go under the jaboa is quick
but the fox is quicker
the jaboa's only hope is to outmaneuver
and he has one last trick up his sleeve
[Music]
hairy feet a shock of hair on the sole
of his feet grips the sand for a quick
turn
desert survival requires sensible
footwear
tonight the desert fox goes hungry
[Music]
you